[Music] Good day, I'm Norman Wildberger In today's
video, we are going to move towards understanding
abstract algebra, a large and lovely area of
mathematics with lots of applications, especially
20th-century developments. We're going to look
at laying the foundations for this subject in,
of course, a better, more solid, more tangible,
and computable way than we currently have.
We're going to be relying very much on our data
structure point of view and the lessons that we
have learned about just how to set up fundamental
arithmetic and a little bit of maxels and vexels.
Okay, so what is abstract algebra? Well, it's not
that easy to say. It's a kind of an extension of
arithmetic or algebra to more general situations,
and these general situations include lots of
things which have perhaps some fancy names.
So we're talking about groups, rings, fields,
vector spaces, algebras, lattices, modules,
Lie algebras, hypergroups, and one could fill
the page with more objects that are studied
in modern abstract algebra. Roughly speaking,
this list sort of corresponds to the order
in which an undergraduate might learn about
these various topics, but there's
quite a bit of variability possible.
Okay, so the common features of most of
these situations are that we have some basic
algebraic objects, usually one or two algebraic
objects, and they're often called addition or
multiplication or variants of them, but not
always. Another common feature is that we're
generally generalizing common or familiar objects
or arithmetical situations. So the idea is that
we have some particular domain of investigation
in which we have some arithmetical operations,
and we look at the essential features of that
situation and try to extract the skeletal
underpinnings of that situation in order to
generalize. So we start with a particular object,
and then we want to generalize to include a
wider family of objects that share a lot of
the properties of the main one that we
started with. And the idea is then to,
well, try to say things in a way that
covers this wider range of objects,
even though maybe we're still focusing
our intuition on the fundamental examples.
Okay, so what do we do in abstract algebra?
Well, one of the kinds of things that we do is
we are interested in structure. We're interested
in determining what these objects look like,
and we're interested in classifying them to create
lists or a taxonomy of various things that satisfy
the framework that we have generalized. And once
we start doing abstract algebra quite a lot,
we start to see that there are certain patterns of
thinking, certain standard kinds of constructions
or ideas that end up recurring, including, for
example, the idea of substructure. We identify
some particular kind of structure, and then we
look inside those structures for other structures
that are basically similar to the original one.
We think about product or sum structures. We've
got some kind of object, maybe a group, and
over here is another group. We think about
how we can combine those groups, maybe add them
or multiply them to create some bigger group. We
look at quotient structures—that's a little bit
more subtle. So that's what happens when you have
one object of a certain kind, and then inside you
have some other kind of object of the same kind,
but it's definitely inside. And then
the idea of sort of taking a quotient,
like dividing the big one by the little one, to
get another, a third kind of object of the same
kind. So investigating when that's possible,
that's an interesting kind of question.
A very general kind of consideration is
the idea of understanding relationships
between two objects, like let's say we're
looking at lattices. So here's a lattice,
there's a lattice. We're interested in what kind
of relations there are between these lattices,
and this is often framed in terms of the
word homomorphism, which we think of as a
mapping or a function or a transformation that
takes the elements of one lattice to the other
lattice but preserves the lattice properties. So
whatever a lattice is, it has certain properties,
and we want our relations and homomorphisms to
preserve or to respect the various arithmetical
or algebraic structures that we have. So
these are some of the common features that
figure in pretty well the study of any one of
these kinds of abstract algebraic structures.
So today, we want to give a very brief kind of
overview of some of these kinds of objects in a
kind of cursory overview but with a traditional
point of view. All right, so this is following
sort of standard thinking, and then later on, we
want to move towards a better, new, improved way
of thinking about these same things. But let's
start with a somewhat more familiar look at them.
Now, it's often considered that group theory
is the natural entrance to abstract algebra
because it's an algebraic situation where you
only have one operation, and the operation is
sometimes called addition and sometimes called
multiplication. So I'm not going to, in this
lecture, concentrate on the official definitions
of things. I'm going to rather give you a brief
orientation by showing you some examples. Now,
we actually have talked about groups a number of
times already in this series. You can have a look
through the series for some examples, for example,
when we were talking about the projective line,
projective plane, and isometries. So say the
projective line, okay? So another example of a
group that we've talked about is these U-groups.
So for example, U10, and U10 was the integers less
than 10 that are relatively prime to 10. In other
words, integers that don't have any factors
in common with 10. So that would be 1, 3, 7,
and 9. And we saw that we could make an algebraic
structure out of just those four objects by doing
multiplication mod 10. All right, so here's the
multiplication table that we considered. One is
the identity, so 1 * anything is that anything,
and say 3 * 7. Well, that's 21, but if we're
working mod 10, 21 is the same as 1, so 3 * 7 is
1. And this is a commutative group, reflected in
the symmetry of the multiplication table, that
the 9 * 3 entry is the same as the 3 * 9 entry, so
that entry and that entry are the same. And that's
a very special and pleasant kind of group. It's
much simpler than the non-commutative groups, and
so the basic properties of a group are that the
multiplication should be associative, that there
should be an identity element (in this case, one),
and that every element should have an inverse.
Basically, it means that along every row or every
column, you can find a one entry. So those are
commutative groups, and they are quite a pleasant
thing to study, and they come up in practice, for
example, here, okay? But in other situations too.
And then there are non-commutative groups, which
have the same underlying rules, except that the
multiplication of two elements doesn't need to be
commutative. So a * b does not have to be equal
to b * a. And we've seen some examples of that,
for example, the group S3, which is the group of
permutations of three things. We can label those
by thinking about the ordered sets which have 1,
2, and 3 as their elements. So these are like
ordered sets or permutations. These are the six
possible ways of rearranging three objects,
and one interpretation of this group S3—it's
the symmetric group on three things—is as the
transformations of a triangle. So if we here
have a triangle with positions 1, 2, and 3, then,
for example, we can think about the transformation
that takes this triangle and rotates it by a third
of a turn in this direction. Okay, so we take
this triangle here to this position here. Let's
call that transformation sigma, okay? Then that
transformation can be recorded. One way is to say,
well, the one object goes to the two position,
the two object goes to the three position, and
the three object goes to the one position. And
we could record that by having a little table like
this: here are the initial objects, and here are
the new positions that they go to. So the object
one goes to the position two, the object two goes
to the position three, the object three goes to
the position one. And once we have a little table
like that, we can also say, well, why don't we
just record the last row, the bottom row, because
the first row is always 1, 2, 3, and so we can
associate this thing with the ordered set 2, 3,
1. So that would be one way of identifying these
permutations or transformations of a triangle
with these ordered sets. And in this context, the
multiplication is that of combining or composing
transformations. So you do one transformation, and
then you do another transformation after that one,
and that's called composing the transformations,
and that gives an algebraic structure to our
permutations. That's a non-commutative group.
So that's a very interesting family of algebraic
objects—very beautiful, very rich theory. The
non-commutative situation is typically a lot more
advanced and richer and more complicated than
the commutative theory. This division between
commutative and non-commutative kinds of abstract
algebra is a central one in the subject in terms
of organizing the subject. And that also holds
with our next example, the example of rings.
Okay, so let's start with an example of a
commutative ring, and there's a very familiar
example: the example of integers or int. So now we
have two operations: addition and multiplication,
and it's a question of studying not just those
operations in themselves but also how they
interact. So, for example, the addition operation
is commutative and associative, and also the
multiplication is commutative and associative.
It's the multiplication being commutative that
makes the ring be called commutative. The
addition always has to be commutative. Now,
in addition, the two operations interact via
the distributive law that's very familiar to
us. And there's also some extra kinds of things.
There's a zero element which plays an identity
element in terms of addition. There's a one
element which plays an identity role in terms
of multiplication. And then there's a notion of
inverse, closely related to the minus one object,
that allows us to start with an element six and
obtain the inverse of six, namely such that when
we add them, we get the additive identity.
So that's an example of a commutative ring.
And generally, we like to have more than one
example of an algebraic structure. If we don't
have more than one example, then it's not really
important enough to think about generalizing.
So we want to have something where we have a
couple of different situations that all have
some common features, and we can say, ah,
there's some common things going on here in
these different situations; let's abstract those
common features and study this thing abstractly.
Okay, so aside from the integers, another
important commutative ring is the ring
of polynomials or, for us, poly numbers,
which we might denote by poly int. Okay,
so we're talking about things that look like
this in the poly number language. So we have
combinations of numbers, alphas, alpha squares,
alpha cubes, and so on. These are familiar ways
of writing things down which actually officially
are more like column vectors. And we know that we
can add two such polynomials or poly numbers
basically pointwise, so 2 and 3 give us 5,
the alpha minus 4 alpha give us minus 3 alpha,
and the alpha squared was there. But we can also
multiply them in the kind of distributed
way so that 2 minus alpha times 1 plus 4
alpha would be 2 and then plus 8 alpha
minus alpha is a total of 7 alpha,
and minus 4 alpha squared. And with these two
operations of addition and multiplication,
we get a situation which is very parallel
to that of the integers. It's a little bit
bigger and more broad, but it shares a lot of
essential features. And so you can think about a
commutative ring as being some kind of attempt at
generalizing what goes on in these two examples.
So after commutative rings, there's some case
to be made that a field is a natural next kind
of abstract algebraic object to consider. So
the main example there is the rational numbers,
okay? And that's an algebraic domain where we
have addition and multiplication, but prominently,
we also have the inverses of those. We
have subtraction, which we also have in a
commutative ring, but what's especially important
is that we have division at least almost all the
time. So a field is a commutative ring with,
in addition, the possibility of division by
nonzero numbers. So we want that every nonzero
number has an inverse, a multiplicative inverse,
just corresponding to the fact that if you take
a rational number like 5/7, then its inverse
is 7/5. So the rational numbers are a very
interesting and important algebraic domain,
but also full of some subtlety. In particular,
there is the key ambiguity in the specification
of rational numbers because we know that rational
numbers are not uniquely defined. 2/3 is the same
as 8/12, the same as -14/-21, and the rule, of
course, is that there's an unambiguous way of
deciding whether two things are equal. So we would
check this by checking that 2 * 12 is the same as
3 * 8. Okay, but that does make the analysis and
study of rational numbers definitely a little
bit trickier because you have to factor in this
ambiguity in how you specify one of the objects.
And then, for example, we have addition in
a kind of a familiar way that we all know.
We have multiplication, which is familiar enough.
We have division, where you basically multiply by
the inverse or the reciprocal. And so these are
standard examples, but it's a very rich field,
a very important field. Now, students of abstract
algebra these days learn immediately that there
are then other fields as well. There are fields
like the real numbers and the complex numbers,
and maybe fields like a + bθ, where a and b are
rational numbers. This is highly unfortunate,
okay? It's highly unfortunate when students of
abstract algebra, after having spent some time
thinking about rational numbers, are quickly
indoctrinated to believe that there are then
these other fields R and C that are pretty
well the same as rational numbers. Okay,
this is a huge misunderstanding and a blind
spot in modern mathematics. Okay, so in fact,
going from rational numbers to R and C is a huge
step in complexity that really takes us outside of
abstract algebra. Okay, the essence of the idea
of these two things, which is already faulty,
but the essence of this faulty idea is that
we can start doing arithmetic with infinite
processes. Okay, that's the whole point—that
we can take an infinite number of additions,
we can take an infinite number of multiplications,
and we can output the results of those infinite
kinds of procedures and have a viable arithmetic.
But modern students are not told the subtleties,
and so they're just, you know, taught that, well,
there's the rational numbers, and there's the real
numbers and the complex numbers, and they're
all pretty well the same. But the reality is
that they're dramatically different. This
is much, much more solid. These things are
fraught with difficulties, and in fact, when you
look carefully, they don't really work. Okay,
so we have a very big difference of opinion when
it comes to field theory, and that's going to be
a big point here—that our field theory is going
to be very different from the field theory that
you learn at universities these days. We're
going to do field theory solidly, correctly.
So then there's non-commutative rings.
So we started with commutative rings and
then fields, and now we can sort of
backtrack to non-commutative rings,
where the addition is still commutative, but the
multiplication now is no longer commutative. Okay,
there's a standard example of this, which is
a very rich example and hugely important in
mathematics—the example of matrices. And the
simple example is already very interesting:
the 2x2 matrices with integer entries. This is an
arithmetical domain in which we have operations
of addition and multiplication. So the addition
of 2x2 matrices is just the usual pointwise one,
and the product of 2x2 matrices—we know it's this
sort of funny multiplication where, to get this 2,
you multiply that row by that column, so 1
* 2 + 2 * 0. And this -1 is 1 * -7 + 2 * 3.
And that -2 is -1 * 2 + 4 * 0. And that
19 is -1 * -7 + 4 * 3. And in this arena,
we also have this distinguished zero element,
which is the identity for addition—just the
matrix of all zeros. And then we have this curious
identity element for multiplication called I,
which is this matrix with ones on the
diagonal and zeros off the diagonal. Okay,
and this whole story generalizes to 3x3
matrices, 4x4 matrices, and so on. And so we
have this family of these non-commutative rings.
They're very important in mathematics, generating
all kinds of interesting arithmetic that goes
beyond the arithmetic that we're familiar with.
And the last abstract algebraic structure that
I want to tell you about today is probably the
most common one, the one that undergraduates end
up using practically the most—the idea of a vector
space over a field. Okay, there's a very common
example of this, which is the vectors in dimension
three, say, with rational number entries. So this
AB object is actually rather technically subtle to
set up because you need to understand what a field
is first. And we're going to talk about this.
Let's say if we use the rational numbers, which is
our generic field, then we can think about vectors
with three components whose entries are rational
numbers. Okay, and the operations here—there are
two operations, but they're not exactly what you
might think. The first one is vector addition,
which is just the usual addition of vectors
component-wise, like here. But the multiplication
is a more limited multiplication; it's not really
the same as in the ring story. It's not as if we
multiply two vectors; rather, the multiplication
here is what's called scalar multiplication. So in
a vector space, we have the idea of multiplying
vectors by elements in our field. All right,
so for example, here is a vector, and here is
a number five, which we think of as being an
element in the field. And five times this
vector—that makes sense, and it's just the
obvious pointwise multiplication of each entry
here by that scalar. And this is a very important
algebraic object because it's the algebraic
embodiment of our three-dimensional space,
right? We live in three-dimensional space, and
we like to describe that by having coordinates
in a familiar kind of way, and then, you know,
labeling axes and then using parallel lines and
so on to specify directions. So, for example,
go two in this direction and three in this
direction and four in this direction; then we
can get this combined transformation from zero
up to here. So this red directed segment is the
vector (2, 3, 4). It gives us a very physical
interpretation of this algebraic structure.
And this is hugely important in engineering
and many applications and really is a workhorse
for linear algebra, for setting up linear algebra.
There's another example of vector spaces over
fields. So, for example, we could take the 2x2
matrices—in fact, we could take n by m matrices,
they don't have to be square—so just the space of
matrices of a fixed kind or a fixed shape with
rational number entries. You can add those,
and you can multiply them by scalars, and so that
naturally forms a vector space. But there are, in
fact, lots of different examples of vector spaces,
and this is a kind of a key abstract algebraic
object that we're, in fact, going to start with.
So when we start looking at abstract algebra, this
is actually going to be the first one that we look
at seriously, and that'll be quite interesting.
But before we do that, I want to share with
you some of the challenges that modern abstract
algebra has. Now, abstract algebra is not as
fraught with difficulties as modern analysis.
Modern analysis has very, very serious problems.
The problems with abstract algebra are also not to
be diminished; they are also reasonably serious,
but they're not as extensive as for analysis.
But nevertheless, we do have to acknowledge
what they are and have some understanding of
the challenges that we need to overcome to
set up abstract algebra properly, solidly,
in the 21st century. And so the first thing
to understand there is what the problems are,
and then we can talk about how we're
going to overcome them and move beyond.
All right, so that's what we're going to
do in our next video. We're going to look
at some of the logical challenges
with modern abstract algebra. I
hope you'll join me for that. I'm Norman
Wildberger. Thanks for listening [Music].